docs: Gazette September, 2019 (#17548)
gatsbyjs/gatsby: docs/blog/2019-09-11-gazette-september/index.mdx

- Beautiful colours
- That video in the home page background
- Blazing fast navigation thanks to Gatsby

## Theme of the Month

The Gatsby theme of the month is [Novela (a theme by Narative)](https://github.com/narative/gatsby-theme-novela)

![Novela (a Gatsby theme by Narative)](./gatsby-theme-novela-hero.jpg)

With minimal styling and maximum features — including multiple homepage layouts, built-in social sharing and dark mode — Novela makes it easy to start publishing beautiful articles and stories with Gatsby.

I'm a big fan of the team at Narative and think Novela shows off some of the best part of Gatsby themes.

Here is what [Dennis Brotzky](https://twitter.com/_brotzky) (Co-founder, [narative.co](https://www.narative.co/)) had to say:

> We’ve always enjoyed using Gatsby for our projects and when themes were announcement we knew it would be special. Novela is our first dive into themes and we’ve quickly grown to love it. It’s exciting to be part of the formation of a new way to build and share Gatsby sites.

## Gatsby Days, London

The entire Gatsby team is headed to London in a few weeks for our quarterly Gatsby gathering!

> And with that, comes the next Gatsby Days. If you haven't registered already, please do [here](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/resources/gatsby-days/) to watch the Gatsby team and friends talk about exciting new things in the Gatsby world.

Author: ✅

![GraphiQL Code Explorer](./2019-09-1308.05.19.gif)

When you write a query in GraphiQL, this will automatically generate code for you! You can check out Dan's work on [the PR on GitHub](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/17120).

### Notable PRs

It's _really_ hard to pick out favourites from all the incredible contributions you folks make so apologies in advance if I missed anything (let [us](https://twitter.com/gatsbyjs) know on Twitter). Here are my favourites from the past month:

- [Jeremy Albright](https://github.com/Js-Brecht) did some really solid work and fixed an issue where Gatsby CLI would leave your terminal in an inconsistent state in [#16714](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/16714)
- [Nicolas Goutay](https://github.com/phacks) fixed a memory leak in IntersectionObservers (with help from [atomiks](https://github.com/atomiks)) in [#17056](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/17056)
- [Benedikt Franke](https://github.com/spawnia) brought order to some chaos by making root plural fields non nullable in [#15321](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/15321)

> - [Mateusz Burzyński](https://github.com/Andarist) cleaned up several significant parts of Gatsby by refactoring some code paths over to XState in [#17192](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/17192)

Reviewer: just to clarify - it has been using XState already, I've just upgraded it to XState@4, refactored a little bit to use newer APIs, so the visualization is way better than what could be achieved with older implementation

Author: Yup, thank you once again for all of that!

---
title: "Gatsby Gazette: The September Installment"
date: 2019-09-09
author: Sidhartha Chatterjee

> excerpt: "It's September and we're back with a brand new Gatsby Gazette, this time featuring a theme of the month, an RFC to localise documentation and Gatsby Days"

Reviewer 2: UK vs US spelling

```suggestion
excerpt: "It's September and we're back with a brand new Gatsby Gazette, this time featuring a theme of the month, an RFC to localize documentation and Gatsby Days"
```

The Gatsby team has had a busy month. We've made some exciting improvements.

### Accessibility

[Marcy Sutton](https://twitter.com/marcysutton) from Gatsby's Learning team has been doing some incredible work in making Gatsby more accessible by default.

A big part of making the web more accessible is teaching us how to write more accessible apps! Back in June, Marcy conducted some user testing sessions for accessibility research. She wrote about it in her post, [What we learned from user testing of accessible client-side routing techniques with Fable Tech Labs](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/2019-07-11-user-testing-accessible-client-routing/) which I consider canonical and _required_ reading.

Marcy also presented a full-length workshop on [Accessibility in JavaScript Applications for Frontend Masters](https://frontendmasters.com/workshops/javascript-accessibility/), including some exclusive tidbits about building accessible Gatsby sites. In case you haven't read her post or seen her workshop already, please _do_ to learn how to make your web apps more accessible.

### GraphQL

We've made a bunch of improvements to Gatsby's GraphQL layer recently. Here is a quick summary:

> - We now support abstract data interfaces. This means that we can now build Gatsby sites (or themes) that support the same query for multiple data sources. [Mikhail](https://twitter.com/freiksenet) from the core team talks more about this on [Learn With Jason](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALspNtrOqDk)

Reviewer 2: Use 'you', and remove a word.
```suggestion
- We now support abstract data interfaces. This means that you can  build Gatsby sites (or themes) that support the same query for multiple data sources. [Mikhail](https://twitter.com/freiksenet) from the core team talks more about this on [Learn With Jason](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ALspNtrOqDk)
```

> - Materialisation

Reviewer 2: Something along these lines might work here?

_This work included a major refactoring in Gatsby’s data layer. It restores support for a database storage backend within Gatsby, which speeds up builds for larger sites._

Author: Super useful! Thank you. I was wondering how to describe @freiksenet's incredible work here succinctly

> - [Stefan](https://github.com/stefanprobst) added the ability to snapshot your Gatsby schema in [gatsby-plugin-schema-snapshot](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-schema-snapshot/). This enables you lock-down a project’s GraphQL schema.

Reviewer 2: missing word
```suggestion
- [Stefan](https://github.com/stefanprobst) added the ability to snapshot your Gatsby schema in [gatsby-plugin-schema-snapshot](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-schema-snapshot/). This enables you to lock-down a project’s GraphQL schema.
```

> - GraphiQL Explorer is now available in WPGraphQL as well

Reviewer 2: Link to PR and credit author
```suggestion
- GraphiQL Explorer is now available in the WPGraphiQL plugin for WordPress. Thanks to [Henrik](https://github.com/henrikwirth) for [adding this feature](https://github.com/wp-graphql/wp-graphiql/pull/16)
```

### gatsby-plugin-offline v3

> [David](https://twitter.com/davidbailey00) (who recently joined the Gatsby core team) has been working on [gatsby-plugin-offline](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-offline/) for a while and recently released v3 of the plugin.

Reviewer 2: unneeded words? feel free to reject this :)
```suggestion
[David](https://twitter.com/davidbailey00) (who recently joined the Gatsby core team) has been working on [gatsby-plugin-offline](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-offline/) and recently released v3 of the plugin.
```

v3 includes an updated Workbox, the ability to append custom scripts to the generated service worker and many more smaller improvements.

### Optimized JavaScript bundle configuration

[Ward](https://twitter.com/wardpeet) from the core team recently made some improvements to Gatsby's webpack config in [#17093](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/17093). This introduces a better splitChunks config and results in a 400 KB reduction in initial bundle size and a 400 ms faster [TTI](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/lighthouse/audits/time-to-interactive) for [gatsbyjs.org](https://gatsbyjs.org).

Huge shoutout to the Next.js team since we picked this up from them!

### Renovate

> We recently enabled automatic dependency updates using [Renovate](https://renovatebot.com/). As of today, dependencies in all official Gatsby packages are completely up to date.

Reviewer 2: Including major versions?

Author: Good point. Minor and patch only. Will mention that in parentheses.

> This mean faster resolution of bugs caused by upstream issues and also better security.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means faster resolution of bugs caused by upstream issues and also better security.
```

We'd like to thank [Rhys Arkins](https://twitter.com/rarkins) for all his help on setting this up and we highly recommend Renovate!

## Community Highlights

It's been a pretty busy month on the monorepo. We've merged in a _lot_ of your contributions and they've all been amazing. Let's go over some of the highlights!

> ### GraphiQL Code Explorer

Reviewer 3: This section should be Code Exporter

- [Mateusz Burzyński](https://github.com/Andarist) cleaned up and refactored some XState code over to v4, significantly improving the visualization in the process in [#17192](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/17192)
- [Matthew Miller](https://github.com/me4502) fixed an issue that could cause infinite loops in cyclic node trees in [#17078](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/pull/17078)

## Gatsby Site of the month

Brand new month, brand new Gatsby site.

The site of the month is [ghost.org](https://ghost.org)

![ghost.org](./ghost.org_.png)

They built their brand new site in Gatsby and we love it because:

- That video in the home page background
- Nice little animations
- Blazing fast navigation thanks to Gatsby

## Theme of the Month

The Gatsby theme of the month is [Novela (a theme by Narative)](https://github.com/narative/gatsby-theme-novela)

![Novela (a Gatsby theme by Narative)](./gatsby-theme-novela-hero.jpg)

With minimal styling and maximum features — including multiple homepage layouts, built-in social sharing and dark mode — Novela makes it easy to start publishing beautiful articles and stories with Gatsby.

> I'm a big fan of the team at Narative and think Novela shows off some of the best part of Gatsby themes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I'm a big fan of the team at Narative and think Novela shows off some of the best parts of Gatsby themes.
```

Here is what [Dennis Brotzky](https://twitter.com/_brotzky) (Co-founder, [narative.co](https://www.narative.co/)) had to say:

> We’ve always enjoyed using Gatsby for our projects and when themes were announcement we knew it would be special. Novela is our first dive into themes and we’ve quickly grown to love it. It’s exciting to be part of the formation of a new way to build and share Gatsby sites.

## Gatsby Days, London

The entire Gatsby team is headed to London in a few weeks for our quarterly Gatsby gathering!

> And with that, comes the next Gatsby Days. If you haven't registered already, please do [here](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/resources/gatsby-days/) to watch the Gatsby team (and friends) talk about exciting new things in the Gatsby world.

Reviewer 2: avoid non-descriptive link text
```suggestion
And with that, comes the next Gatsby Days. If you haven't already, [you can register here](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/resources/gatsby-days/) to watch the Gatsby team (and friends) talk about exciting new things in the Gatsby world.
```
